[fud2] Document Syntax for Specifying Scripts (#2236)
calyxir/calyx: docs/running-calyx/fud2/scripts.md

These two lines define a `calyx` state and a `verilog` state. The `export` prefix means that these variables will be accessible to other scripts that `import "calyx"`.

Now we will define an operation taking the `calyx` state to the `verilog` state. These operations define functions whose arguments are input files and return values are output values. Their bodies consist of commands that will transform those inputs to those outputs.

```rust,ignore
// define an op called "calyx_to_verilog" taking a "calyx_state" to a "verilog_state".
defop calyx_to_verilog(c: calyx_state) >> v: verilog_state {
    // retrieve a variable from the fud2.toml config
    let calyx_base = config("calyx.base");
    // retrieve a variable from the config, or a default value
    let calyx_exe = config_or("calyx.exe", "${calyx_base}/target/debug/calyx");
    let args = config_or("calyx.args", "");

    // specify a shell command to turn a calyx file "c" into a verilog file "v"
    shell("${calyx_exe} -l ${calyx_base} -b verilog ${args} ${c} > ${v});
}
```

> Counterintuitively, `c`, `v`, `calyx_base`, `calyx_exe`, and `args` do not contain the actual variable values. They contain identifiers which are replaced by the values at runtime. This thwarts the possibility of the different config values or different input file names causing different code paths of a given op to run.

Reviewer: Not totally sure what this means. I'm guessing it means that if you `print(calyx_base)` you don't get the result from the config file. Instead you get some other value which is replaced at runtime. If I'm understanding correctly, I think it's confusing to say this here. It's not really relevant for writing ops, it's a detail of how this is implemented.

Reviewer 2: I think the main thing we need to convey here is that these `defop` bodies generate Ninja code containing Ninja variable references—actual concrete values (like filenames and configuration strings) are only provided at Ninja evaluation time.

So yeah, as @sgpthomas says, if one were to `print` one of these strings, you would not get a concrete filename. I think the way this is tangibly relevant to op-writers is just that they should not think they can write code that looks inside the value of `args`, for example, uses a Rhai `if` to do different things depending on the configuration.

Author: ^^^
Exactly. At least for me the intuitive thing is to treat these `defop` and `config` variables like strings containing actual values. This probably is true for others as the old rust and Rhai let the user access actual values (an op I saw actually uses this!).

As a side note:
I tried to avoid referencing generated Ninja in the example docs. I feel like mentioning it is a bit confusing because it kind of forces the reader to understand the whole Ninja generation stuff, which isn't complicated, but requires the user have at least a passing familiarity of Ninja. 

I think a way to clarify this is adding the line
> For example, `print(args)` would print a `$args` instead of the value assigned by the config.

Author: @sgpthomas, I tried to also clarify the next sentence to make it feel more relevant to the reader. It was a bit weirdly roundabout before.
> An op cannot take different code paths based on config values or different input/output file names.
Do you think the makes the content and purpose of this digression a bit more clear?

If so, I think I'm going to merge this.

Reviewer: Yeah, it’s much more clear now.

These two lines define a `calyx` state and a `verilog` state. The `export` prefix means that these variables will be accessible to other scripts that `import "calyx"`.

> Now we will define an operation taking the `calyx` state to the `verilog` state. These operations define functions where the signiture asserts the result of running the body.

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand "asserts the result of running the body." Maybe we just want to say something like: "Operations are functions whose arguments are input files and return values are output values. Their bodies consist of commands that will transform those inputs to those outputs."

```rust,ignore
// define an op called "calyx_to_verilog" taking a "calyx_state" to a "verilog_state".
defop calyx_to_verilog(c: calyx_state) >> v: verilog_state {
    // retrieve a variable from the fud2.toml config
    let calyx_base = config("calyx.base");
    // retrieve a variable from the config, or a default derived from calyx-base
    let calyx_exe = config_or("calyx.exe", "${calyx_base}/target/debug/calyx");

>     // retrieve a variable from cli options, or with a default

Reviewer 2: To nitpick, _all_ of these could come from either the config file or the command-line options…

    let args = config_or("calyx.args", "");

    // specify a shell command to turn a calyx file "c" into a verilog file "v"
    shell("${calyx_exe} -l ${calyx_base} -b verilog ${args} ${c} > ${v});
}
```

Possibly counterintutively, `c`, `v`, `calyx_base`, `calyx_exe`, and `args` do not contain the actual variable values defined. They contain identifiers which are replaced values by Ninja during runtime. This thwarts the confusing possibility of from different code paths of a given op running despite no changes to a script.

> This example shows off nearly all of the features available for defining ops. The complexity and ability for code reuse, comes from the basic tools of Rhai. Consider if we wanted to create a second, similar op `calyx_noverify`. We can factor the contents of `calyx_to_verilog` into a new function and call that funtion in both ops.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example shows off nearly all of the features available for defining ops. Scripts can reuse functionality by exploiting the basic tools of Rhai scripting. Consider if we wanted to create a second, similar op `calyx_noverify`. We can factor the contents of `calyx_to_verilog` into a new function and call that function in both ops.
```

```
// a function constructing a shell command to take a calyx in_file to a verilog out_file
// this function adds `add_args` as extra arguments to it's call to the calyx compiler
fn calyx_cmd(in_file, out_file, add_args) {

>     // retrieve a variable from the fud2.toml config

Reviewer 2: Maybe no need to repeat the comments in the second version, just to make it faster to read.

    let calyx_base = config("calyx.base");
    // retrieve a variable from the config, or a default derived from calyx-base
    let calyx_exe = config_or("calyx.exe", "${calyx_base}/target/debug/calyx");
    // retrieve a variable from cli options, or with a default
    let args = config_or("calyx.args", "");

    // specify a shell command to turn a calyx file into a verilog file
    shell("${calyx_exe} -l ${calyx_base} -b verilog ${args} ${add_args} ${in_file} > ${out_file});
}

// define an op called "calyx_to_verilog" taking a "calyx_state" to a "verilog_state".
defop calyx_to_verilog(c: calyx_state) >> v: verilog_state {
    calyx_cmd(c, v, "");
}

// define an op called "calyx_noverify" taking a "calyx_state" to a "verilog_state".
defop calyx_to_verilog(c: calyx_state) >> v: verilog_state {
    calyx_cmd(c, v, "--disable-verify");
}
```

## Example Script (Legacy)

> We'll walk through how to write a script that adds support for using the `calyx` compiler.

Reviewer 2: Maybe let's be explicit about what the reader is seeing here… something like, "The previous section showed a high-level way to specify operations that abstracts away the mechanics of generating Ninja code. There is also a second interface for specifying the low-level machinery for Ninja directly. It's more verbose but gives you more control over the generated Ninja file."

## API

### High Level Rhai

#### defop

```
defop <op name>(<input1>: <input1 state>, <input2>: <input2 state> ...) >> <target1>: <target1 state>, <target2>, <target2 state> ... {
    <statements>
}
```
Defines an op with `<op name>` which runs `<statements>` to generate target states from input states. 

The name, inputs, and targets are called the signature of the op. `<statements>` is called the body of the op.

#### shell

```
shell(<string>)
```

> When called in the body of an op, that op will run `<string>` as a shell command to generate its targets. It is an error to call `shell` outside of the body of an op. Additionally, it is an error to call `shell` in the body of an op in which `shell_deps` was called prior.

Reviewer 2: While this is a good description of how to think about `shell` at a high level, maybe we should add a second paragraph to demystify what happens at the Ninja level. Something like this:

> In the generated Ninja code, `shell` will create both a `rule` wrapping the shell command and a `build` command that invokes that rule. When a `defop` contains multiple `shell` commands, fud2 automatically generates Ninja dependencies among the `build` commands to ensure that they run in order.
